
The release procedure for scwm:

1) Try to do some pre-testing.

2) When source has reached state believed to be releaseable, ask other
developers w/ CVS access to hold off on making changes until the
release.

3) Update THANKS and AUTHORS, examining the ChangeLogs for
contributors. Also update NEWS with all user-visible changes since the
last release, ANNOUNCE with highlights from NEWS and other
announcement information, and BUGS and TODO to make sure they are
vaguely up to date.

4) Grab hypothetical distribution directories by `cvs export'ing both
the scwm and scwm-icons modules, and running `./autogen.sh'

5) Make sure the sources configure, make, make install, run, and make
uninstall with both the latest Guile snapshot and the most recent
stable release. If this step fails, correct the problems and check in
the results, then go back to step 4.

6) Update the version number in configure.in, and make an appropriate
ChangeLog entry for the release.

7) Tag the repository (I've been using hte convention of using v
followed by the version number with all periods replaced by dashes,
e.g. v0-7).

8) Export modules to tar up, creating directories that contain the
version number (e.g. scwm-0.8/). 

9) Make the tarballs.

10) Place the tarballs in the usual locations:

* /home/ftp/pub/scwm (group scwm-dev has write permissons)
 
* My web server directory (I should obsolete this, the ftp site is
probably more heavily used, and quite sufficient.)

11) Update the web site. Taking some hilights from NEWS and fixing the
version numbe references is useful (the web stuff will move to a CVS
module RSN and the scwm web site will move to running off of
huis-clos).

12) Send out the release announcement. I send announcements to the
following places:

E-mail:
scwm-announce@huis-clos.mit.edu
guile@cygnus.com
scsh@ai.mit.edu (this is at the invitation of Olin Shivers)

I also usually send a brief announcement including mostly
gnome-relevant things to gnome-list@gnome.org (I think you need to be
on it to post), but this is not crucuial.

Newsgroups:
comp.lang.scheme
comp.os.linux.announce
comp.windows.x.announce

Web Sites and/or Ftp Archives (getting volunteers to do these is sufficent):

http://www.freshmeat.net
ftp://ftp.red-bean.com/pub/guile/incoming 
(and send mail to Pat Eyler <pate@nortom.com> to update the guile
contrib directory)


Other Announce Location Ideas (not tried yet):

It is probably also a good idea to come up with a .lsm file and stick
it in the distribution, and submit stuff the the Linux Software Map
(how do you do this?) and the Sunsite archive.

http://www.slashdot.org may also be willing to run a brief article
They regularly cover Enlightenment, WindowMaker and AfterStep, and
recently sometimes BlackBox; highlighting the way scwm differs from
these [IMO: More emphasis on configuring behavior rather than snazzy
look; old-school hacker appeal; the "emacs of window managers"] may be
useful in convincing Rob Malda to run the announcement.


